Okay, gang, this is module two and chapter three. In module two, you will notice that chapter three is the only chapter uh, in this second module. So, um, let me point out that that is indicative of it is um, importance. Um, this chapter is about, uh, supply and demand. Um, so the good news is that you only have one chapter in this module. Uh, the bad news, if you will, is that I expect you to know, uh, the concepts in this chapter very thoroughly. All right, so to do that, uh, we're going to start out with a few kind of introductory concepts. And the first one that we need to tackle is this little Latin phrase called ceteris paribus or cedar's paribus, depending on where you from. Ceteris paribus means other things being equal. You can think about this in a few different ways. You can think about it as all else held constant, or everything else, uh, being equal. So think about this. Go back to your eighth grade science class, where your teacher asked you to figure out the best place in your home to grow bread mold. And you took several slices out of the bread bag and you distributed them around the house. You put one in your windowsill, one under your, uh, brother's bed, uh, one in your mom's closet and, uh, one under your dad's bathroom seat sink, that they'll grow your bread mold. Right? Uh, moist and dark. Now, in that little experiment, you're going to leave some bread in the bread bag. Uh, what do you call? Call that in, um, this experiment? Well, you call that the control group or the constant? Right. Um, that is to say that you're not going to allow any other, uh, variables to affect, uh, the bread and egg. Uh, and why do you need a control group or a constant? Well, that is so that, uh, you can compare, uh, um, the, uh, bread that you've distributed throughout your home with the bread that's still in the bag. Uh, you exposed the other pieces of bread to light or darkness or moisture or temperature, uh, something like that. So you need a control group or a constant, uh, to have a standard with which to compare. Now, all of that, that little story is a biology experiment, a hard science experiment, if you will. But economics is not a hard science. Uh, economics is a soft science. It deals with people. And you can't put people in a bread bag, right? You can't even lock them up in a in a closet legally. Right. And say, don't let any of these other factors influence your economic decision making. So, uh, suppose, if you will, that we as an economics class, wanted to know how a five cent increase in the price of gas impacted, uh, the goings on at a particular gas station? Well, uh, there's a lot going on. Or at least there could be. Right. Um, you think about why people stop, uh, at a particular station to buy gas. Is it because it's closer to your home or work or school? Is it because it's on the right side of the road and not the left? And you don't want to have to, uh, cross four lanes of traffic to get to it? Uh, is it because they give you a free cup of coffee? Uh, when you fill up or, um, or a free car wash if you spend, uh, $30 or more? Uh, is it because the checkout clerk is a hottie and you want to see them one more time? Well, okay, probably not, but you get the idea, right? And so if if we wanted to know about how a five cent increase in the price of gas impacted the goings on there, we would have to. So that's our variable, our our five cent increase in the price of gas. That's the thing that we want to focus on. That's the thing that we want to know about. And we would have to assume, ceteris paribus, we would have to assume that everything else was being held constant other than the one variable in question. So we would have to assume that there's not a large sporting event in Korea today. Um, you know, bringing more traffic, uh, by the station, we would have to assume that there's not a large tanker truck, uh, blocking six of the eight pumps. We would have to assume that the coffee is still good, and the, uh, carwash still works, and the checkout clerk is just as hot as they've always been right now. Is that true? In the real world? No, no, everything is always changing in the real world. But here we go again. Listen carefully. It is impossible for us as human beings, uh, to get our finite minds around an infinite number of possibilities. And so, since we can't create it, if you will, in a, in a, in a hard science sense, in a vacuum, then we have to assume it. All right. Uh, now, you may, uh, think that that's just crazy. Um, but we do it all the time. Think about this. You're watching, uh, your your sports team play, you lose the game. You think back over the game and you say, if we had just made those free throws then, or if we had just kicked that field goal then, or if we just hadn't struck out, then. Well, what are you doing? Well, you're assuming, ceteris paribus, you're assuming that everything else about the game would have been just as it was. Um, so this is a this is a useful tool in our study of economics, and we're going to use it, um, pretty much for the rest of the class. We will assume, ceteris paribus. Uh, okay. So moving on then, to a few more, uh, preliminary things. The next thing we need to talk about is that we will. Be graphing quite a bit. Uh, certainly in this chapter and in chapters to come. And when we graphically illustrate concepts in economics, generally speaking, um, those, uh, fall under two types of slopes. In other words, generally speaking, we're going to be talking about upward sloping curves and downward sloping curves. Okay. Uh, and these slopes are indicative of the relationships between the variables in question. One more time. They are indicative of the relationships between the variables in question. So if you have an upward sloping curve, this indicates a positive relationship, uh, between the variables. And we also say that's a direct relationship. Um, anytime you have a, uh, positive relationship between variables, that is going to cause your curve, uh, to slope upward. On the other hand, uh, downward sloping curves show you that there is an indirect or a negative or an inverse relationship between the variables. Okay. So let's take a look at a couple of examples. Okay. So um, I have on this slide, um, a question about, uh, the relationship or the correlation, uh, between, uh, murder and ice cream and between, uh, temperature and long sleeve shirts worn on campus. So, look, let's look at this, um, um, set of axes here on the left about, uh, the relationship between murders and ice cream. Would you believe me if I told you that in the city of Chicago, there is a, uh, correlation between the number of ice cream cones sold in a given month and the number of murders committed in that month. And you may say, well, that is preposterous. There's no way. Uh, but I want you to listen to what I'm saying. I'm not saying that there is causation. I am not saying that people are eating ice cream and it's causing them to murder people. No, I'm simply saying that there is causation. In fact, uh, it is true that as the number of murders. I'm sorry, ice cream cones sold increases, the number of murders also will increase right now. Why is that? Well, for it's the weather, right? It's the summertime, generally speaking, uh, there is an increase in violent crime in most major cities in the summer. Right? Days are longer, there's more human interaction. Um, people get hot and, uh, perturbed, if you will. Uh, and so it just so happens that the summertime is also, uh, when people eat more ice cream. So if you think about what the slope of that curve would look like, would it be, uh, upward sloping, indicating a positive relationship between the variables, or would it be downward sloping, indicating an inverse or indirect relationship? All right. Think about that for a minute. All right. Let's take two other variables. Let's take temperature in degrees Fahrenheit outside and the number of long sleeved shirts worn on campus. All right. Uh, what would you expect, uh, to be the relationship there? Would you expect it to be an upward sloping curve indicating a positive or a direct relationship? Uh, between those variables, temperature goes up, the number of long sleeve shirts goes up. Or would you expect it to be downward sloping because of the negative or inverse relationship? That is to say, as temperature, uh, goes up, the number of long sleeve shirts on campus decreases. Well, obviously, uh, you can see, uh, the relationship. Then write that if, uh, the number of ice cream cones sold increases in the same month that the number of murders increases, that gives you an upward sloping curve because of the direct relationship between those variables. On the other hand, uh, it makes sense that if it's 95 freakin degrees outside, generally speaking, you expect a low number of long sleeved shirts to be worn on campus. And then as the temperature falls, uh, to say, 45 degrees outside, uh, there would be an increase. In, uh, the number of long sleeved shirts. So that's what we mean by the, uh, nature of the relationship between the variables in question, uh, causing, uh, curves to be upward sloping or downward sloping. Okay, now, the next thing that we need to talk about is that, um, different events in different markets can, um, cause these, um, graphs to look differently. In other words, we will display graphically these different economic impacts. So, uh, we say that sometimes some events cause a shift in the curve. That means the entire curve moves. And when we shift a curve, uh, we will, uh, if we want to indicate an increase, we'll shift that curve to the right. Or if we want to indicate a decrease, we will shift that curve to the left. Okay. On the other hand, some other economic variables will cause simply a movement along the curve from point to point. All right. So now these graphs get a little busy here. But I want you to slow down and take it piece by piece as we discuss. All right. So first of all let's look at this, uh, graph on the right and think about um. What we said about a movement along the curve from point to point. So here, if you remember back from your like eighth grade geometry class, uh, we have a x, y, um.

Uh, coordinate. Yeah, I almost forgot myself. X y coordinate. Right where it's 95 degrees outside, and only 20 long sleeve shirts are worn on campus. Um, and so. And then if the temperature falls to 45 degrees outside, uh, we see an increase in long sleeve shirts. And there's another x y coordinate here, a point, if you will. And so because at this point in the story, we're only talking about the two variables on our axes temperature and long sleeve shirts. We simply move along the original, uh, downward sloping curve, uh, from point to point. Okay. However, other things can happen in the world. For example, all of you remember the Covid pandemic. Um, and at most colleges and universities, uh, there was, uh, some at least temporary, uh, shutdowns where, uh, there were, um, very few, if any, students on campuses. So can you imagine, then, that the number of long sleeved shirts worn on campus would decrease, regardless of the weather outside? Regardless if it was 45 degrees or 95 degrees, there would be a decrease in the number of long sleeved shirts simply because there were many fewer people on campus. So that's a it's a it's a new variable, if you will, a new event that occurred. Okay. So when we say a decrease we will shift the curve to the left. On the other hand, suppose if you will, uh, that, uh, your institution, uh, cut tuition in half. Uh, 50% decrease in tuition. Well, again, can you imagine then that there would be more people taking classes on your campus and therefore more long sleeved shirts on campus, regardless of the temperature, regardless of the variable? On the vertical axis here. So that's what we mean when we say these curves will shift to the right or shift to the left, depending on, uh, the event. And by the way, it doesn't matter how the curve is sloped. So remember, if you will, uh, the graph on the right indicates a downward sloping curve. And the graph over here on the left indicates an upward sloping curve. But um, again, if there was a huge increase in the population of a particular city, you would expect more murders and more ice cream regardless of the month. And if there was suddenly a decrease, uh, the same thing would work here with, uh, Covid, you know, everybody was staying inside. Um, and if more people were staying inside, you would expect people to be, uh, eating less ice cream and, uh, less murders happening, uh, regardless of the month of the year. All right. So let all that, like, deeply, uh, saturate, uh, your brain as far as, uh, concepts. Um, that we will apply um, throughout, uh, not only this, um. Chapter, uh, but throughout the rest of the course. All right.